Once around the Whirlpool Galaxy, a
lovely object to observe through a small
telescope and the better your telescope,
the more fantastic it looks. A grand
design spiral galaxy with a twist which
you can already see on the screen
there. Now, the Whirlpool lives in the
constellation Canis Vanatisi, the
hunting dogs, which lies below the tail
of the great bear. It's not a
particularly prominent constellation. It
does have one interesting star,
Coreroli, the brightest of uh the stars
within the group. Uh but there are a
number of galaxies present. And the
Whirlpool galaxy was first discovered in
1773 by Charles Messier, that great
comet hunter, and he put it in his
catalog as number 51. So we often call
it just M51.
The first person to observe that it was
more than just a
nebula cloud of gas in the sky was
William Parson's third Earl Ross. He
resided at Burr Castle shown at the top
left there. And in the grounds he built
the Leviathan of Parson's Town, a 72in
reflecting telescope. Absolute monster
instrument. You can see it in the image
there between the two retaining walls.
Um, and of course it can only move up
and down and a little bit side to
side. It was the largest telescope in
the world at the time. Although using a
speculum metal mirror rather than a
glass mirror limited its uh light
gathering capacity somewhat, but it was
huge and it enabled Lord Ross to do this
diagram drawing at the bottom right
1845 of the galaxy the Whirlpool galaxy
showing the spiral structure for the
first time. He was the very first to
observe that and also to see that little
blob on the side there which is perhaps
the most interesting part of it. So what
do we now know? Well, it's a smaller
galaxy than the Milky Way. It's only 88%
of the diameter and of course that means
it's smaller in both
uh dimensions sideways and thinner. And
the result is that there's only about
10% of the total mass of our Milky Way
present. 160 billion solar masses, not
1.5
trillion. And it's also estimated to be
a very young galaxy, only 400 million
years old. That's less than a tenth the
age of our sun and a lot less than the
Milky Way, which dates back even
further. It's part of a group. A lot of
galaxies are part of a group. This one
has its own group, the M51 group. about
23 to 31 million light years from us.
And it comprises the Whirlpool Galaxy,
the Sunflower Galaxy, which is the one
at the bottom there, a very fluffy
looking galaxy. Still got the spiral
arms there. And a couple of smaller
ones, which just have those new general
catalog numbers of 5023 and
5229 and a somewhat more lenticular
irregular sort of galaxies, a little bit
smaller. And this group, well, it might
be associated with the M101 pin wheelel
galaxy and its group. We're not quite
sure. They're possibly slightly too far
away to really be classed as the same
group, but it does make for fantastic
images when you point really good
telescopes at it. Uh the image on the
left there is invisible light and you
can see the nucleus in the center and
the spiral arms winding away from it
with the dirty dusty material in the
spiral arms. Lots of filaments running
everywhere and lots and lots of H2
regions, those pink bits in the spiral
arms. Those are where new stars are
forming. And if we look in infrared on
the right, then you can really see the
activity in the spiral arms is uh
definitely keeping them at a much higher
average temperature, warming them up
dramatically. Here's four more images at
different wavelengths. So we've got the
visible spectrum on the left. Then we
have the visible green, blue, and
infrared merged together.
The third one along is three different
colors from three different infrared
wavelengths to 3.6, 4.5, and 8 microns.
And then we've got a far infrared image
at 24 microns. And each one of them
reveals different aspects of the
structure of this uh arrangement to us.
You can already see in these images that
the blob that William Parsons discovered
seems to be sitting just behind a long
tail of the spiral arm going out towards
the top of this particular set of
images. And that is a small galaxy uh
sometimes called
M51B. And we think that this galaxy has
passed through the disc of the main
galaxy possibly twice. Once around 600
million years back when the galaxies
were just beginning to form and then
again more recently about a 100 million
years. Now there are various plumes of
material. You can see these white
ghostly patches at the bottom of the
diagram there that have been erupted
away. This is tidal disruption in the
struggle between the gravity of the two
bodies, hurling stars and gas out away
in these great big long plumes. And the
northwest plume that's uh 140,000 light
years in length overall. It's in fact
longer than the diameter of the main
galaxy. Again, if we uh delve into the
galaxy and use different wavelengths, we
can see that star formation going
on highlighted in the purple and yellow
patches in the spiral arms. There is a
terrific amount of it going on. And this
could be triggered by the merger that is
underway, the
galaxing disruption in the tide with the
tidal forces. Or it could just be
because this is a rather young galaxy.
We're not entirely sure what the trigger
process
is. As a result of all those new stars
forming though, you get a lot of giant
stars formed and those don't live very
long and explode as supernovi. And
there's three detections of supernovi
that have been revealed here. We've got
images of each of them. SN
1994I top right that is a type 1 C
supernova. So a very massive star which
had already blown away the unburned
hydrogen of its outer envelope leading
to the spectrum of the light coming from
it being from the interior helium core.
Um so it's entirely dominated by helium.
That's why it's described as type 1 C.
Supernova 2005 CS shown bottom right is
much more of a traditional core collapse
type two supernova from a standard red
super giant star and
2011 DH also type two but showed a much
bluer average color and the progenitor
for that was probably rather unusual in
that it was a yellow super giant that
exploded.
We've also seen a rather strange
eruption that was a supernova impostor
and the two photographs here show the
before and after effects of it. So on
the 5th of March 2019 you can see the
bright dot there and in the 2005 image
in color it's gone. But this wasn't a
supernova. It was a luminous red nova.
It was two stars crashing into each
other. Fairly rare event. And the
Spitzer Space Telescope was able to take
a pre-image and actually find the
culprit, the progenitor system where
this erupted. Now the image at the
bottom is not of this object. That's
actually V838 Monosertos which was in
our galaxy where we could see the
process erupting much more uh detail and
closer than all the way out to M51. But
we think this was the same type of
thing. Now deep in the nucleus of the
galaxy there's also a lot of activity.
It's called an active galactic nucleus
um or a type two safetert galaxy. And
the central black hole is presently
feeding on material falling into it. Not
unexpected for a young galaxy. And the
result of that is a lot of radiation
coming away from the accretion disc
that's formed around the central black
hole.
And in 1992, the Hubble Space Telescope
took a picture on the right of the heart
of the galaxy, and it shows the light
coming away from the central black hole
region and the accretion disc with a
sort of dark cross and that's dust
blocking our line of sight. Uh
originally they thought there were two
sources of light either side of that
mark. You can see the brightest regions
there, but a higher resolution image
revealed what was going
on. Now, we've also discovered possibly
the first extra galactic planet lurking
out there in M51 in the Whirlpool
Galaxy. But this was detected by an
X-ray observation. The Chandra Space
Telescope, an X-ray telescope, detected
a source of X-rays, M51
ULS1. And this is an X-ray binary. It's
a classic example of a collapsed star.
So, a neutron star or a black hole.
We're not entirely sure which. that is
accreting matter and pulling a streamer
of matter away from its swollen
companion, which is in this case a
massive blue hot super giant star. It's
rapidly losing mass and it's then
spiraling in in a death spiral into the
gravity well of the collapsed star. And
that is resulting in a lot of friction
raising the temperature in the accretion
disc causing X-rays to be emitted.
And what Chandra spotted was a repeat
pattern of
a dip in the X-rays caused, we assume,
by the passage of a planet about the
size of Saturn, perhaps a little
smaller, passing across in front of the
source of the X-rays and blocking the
light. So, it's orbiting round a few
tens of astronomical units away from the
center and repeatedly getting in our
line of sight and blocking the X-rays.
So, it' be fantastic to uh be able to
confirm this observation and have
discovered the first extragalactic
planet, a planet orbiting in another
galaxy
entirely. And with that, I'll leave it
there. Thank you very much for listening
and I hope you've enjoyed that.